**CHAPTER 4: A PROXIMATE BIBLE**

**What's in a Title?**

Do titles matter? I think so. I have titled this project "a proximate
bible" and in a way, this title says everything without determining
anything. Three things have haunted my professional and academic work
for the better part of the last decade - the cultural construction of
this phenomenon we call bible, the infinite resistance to consumption in
Emmanuel Levinas's idea of proximity, and the role of technology in
both. These questions of bible, proximity and technology have found
their expression for me in the material life and afterlives of bible as
book.

Most would agree that *what* we read shapes what we know and how we make
sense of the world. There may not be a *what* more read over the years
in the Western world than bible.[^1]

**Bible as Media**

I have spent the better part of two decades reading this bible *what*
closely and reading others write about their reading of it. As important
as the content of bible has been in the development and demise of
culture, I wonder if *how* we read impacts meaning making as much as
*what* we read? Here, I am unabashedly building on Marshall McLuhan's
prescient axiom from the 1960s, "the medium is the message."[^2]

![](media/image1.png){width="6.5in" height="4.875in"}

This quote and clip introducing McLuhan and pointing toward his notion
of medium sets the stage for bible as a medium, a technology, even an
extension of ourselves.[^3]

**Book of Books**

With McLuhan's influence established, I'll return to my title, "a
proximate bible." I'll begin with the end, "bible." With Emmanuel
Levinas, bible is for me the book of books.[^4] Yet, it is the material
lives of bible as book, bible as technology, that drive the questions
and experiments of *a proximate bible*. From the early adoption of codex
book technologies for Christian scriptures to the deep relationship
between bible and the rise of print to the challenge of imagining bible
in the age of mobile technologies, bible as book offers a fantastic
window into *how* we read and how this impacts what it means to be
human.

**Material Bible**

This approach to bible *as* media forms part of a larger methodology I
call *material bible*. Material bible approaches foreground the
materiality of practices that construct the cultural phenomenon of
bible. What we mean by bible is intimately shaped by the fact that it
was drawn on the walls of underground burial spaces or inscribed on skin
as tattoos, that we parade around ritual spaces holding bible, and that
we read bible on a device with covers and bound at the spine or on a
mobile phone.

Several conversations have helped push me toward this material bible
perspective. Most formative for my thinking has been Tim Beal's cultural
history approach as embodied in his book *The Rise and Fall of the
Bible* and his work as editor of *The Oxford Encylopedia of the Bible
and the Arts*. Others include the iconic books symposia, material
scripture discussions such as that fostered by the Institute for
Signifying Scriptures, Manuel Vasquez's Material Theory of Religion,
particularly his questioning of the textualization of religion, and N.
Katherine Halyes's "media specific analysis."

**Proximate An-archy**

The first question my close friend and colleague Dr. Eric Smith asked me
when he saw my title "a proximate bible" for the first time was
"proximate to what?" Regardless of how I respond to Eric, it is this
question that begs the project. Yet, instead of simply defining the
terms in a spatially proximate relationship, I will ask *how* bible is
proximate and *a*pproximate in its infinite afterlives as book and how
might this impact human meaning making? Proximity provides a shorthand
for a set of practices of anarchic meaning making that guide both my
theoretical inquiry and my writing process in this project.

Anarchic is a loaded term and can mean many things. Contrary to some
initial impressions of both my work and my person, I am not the least
interested in a simple notion of anarchy as chaos or disorder. Along the
lines of Levinas, I exploit the variability of the semantic range of
αρχη in Greek and use an-archic to denote a practice of meaning making
without recourse to the *reign* of an *original*.[^5] Levinasian
proximity as an anarchic encounter with the face of the other will offer
questions toward the role of bible in shaping nonconsumptive (ethical)
meaning making. The spatiality of the term proximity invokes Edward
Soja's thirdspace as an anarchic meaning making practice that takes
seriously the material spatiality of bible as media. Phonetically adding
the indefinite article of my title to proximate, I hear a resonance with
the explicit anarchy of Jean Baudrillard's simulacrum, which questions
the entire notion of original or real and sees all meaning as infinite
simulation or approximation. See anarchic approximations[^6] for more
detail on my relationship to anarchy.

So, *a proximate bible*, with its indefinite article and phonetic
multivalence suggests that a close look at the material spatiality of
the plurality of bible as media could offer a window into the
possibility for anarchic, and therefore human, meaning making practices.

**Pathways and Fragments**

It would be hard to identify all of the voices that continue to shape
the manner in which I am approaching the performance of this project.
Mostly, I am trying to practice a medium for writing and reading that
creates spaces for a polyphony (thanks Justin Barber for reminding me of
the fecundity in this word) of emergences. One of the deep suspicions
undergirding the questions in this project is the tendency of the codex
to shape human reading, and therefore human thinking, toward closure.

If questioning the codex (and other media technologies) is one of the
operative values of *a proximate bible*, and if we grant that the
dissertation genre is codex par excellence, then it makes sense for me
to experiment here with media technologies otherwise than codex.[^7] A
few of the major influences on my methodologies in *a proximate bible*
are the entanglement of production and reception in Timothy Beal's
notion of cultural history,[^8] the life of the fragment in Walter
Benjamin's *Arcades Project*,[^9] and Michel De Certeau's infinite
interplay of strategy and tactic in *The Practice of Everyday
Life*.[^10] All three remind us of the critical value of *use* in the
meaning made of material objects.

![](media/image2.jpeg){width="6.5in" height="3.6506944444444445in"}

The complex interplay of production and reception in Beal's cultural
history of bible[^11] has challenged me to compose *a proximate bible*
in a public online space to foreground engagement (reception) as an
always present part of the production process. I will compose and curate
with the native cloud application [Evernote](https://evernote.com/) and
use the integration with [postach.io](http://postach.io/) to "publish"
posts to the web.[^12] Postach.io provides an embeded discussion space
at the bottom of each post using a seemless integration with one of the
most ubiquitous online discussion engines available -
[disqus](https://disqus.com/). The behind the scenes integration of
these three different tools to create a platform in which we will
perform a proximate bible already signals some otherwise-than-print
material practices at work. My committee will use this disqus space to
participate in the project along the way to share their comments,
suggestions, ideas and questions. From time to time, I will also share
links from *a proximate bible* on social media channels such as
[twitter](https://twitter.com/textpotential) and
[facebook](https://www.facebook.com/mphemenway) to encourage others to
participate in the construction of this space. These discussion areas
are as much a part of the production of *a proximate bible* as anything
I "publish."[^13]

Walter Benjamin's Arcades Project brilliantly performs the proximity in
Emmanuel Levinas's statement about Hebrew syntax where "words coexist
rather than immediately being co-ordinated or subordinated with and to
one another."[^14] In a literary world often dominated by the totality
and linear coherence of the whole, Benjamin's literary montage
methodology explores the potential of the fragment.[^15]

![](media/image3.png){width="6.5in" height="1.104861111111111in"}

The bits and memes and apps of our present new media landscape seem to
share Benjamin's valuation of the fragment. Holding these two
sensibilities together, I will collect artifacts of varied types--text,
image, video, etc.--and use them. In this use, I will make other
fragments for people to encounter and use. Intentionally, the space of
*a proximate bible* will allow these fragments to cohabitate,
coordinated only by the timestamp of each post's creation or a chance
mention of a post in another. My hope is that people will make their own
paths along these fragments, stopping while something catches their
fancy and moving on in any direction that strikes them. Undoubtedly,
themes and patterns will emerge, but these will be shaped by the uses we
make of the fragments more than a predetermined outline driving us
toward a thesis.

Yet, in order to even begin the process of exploring, sometimes we need
a path. As this graphic from Ben Higmore's slideshare presentation
"Michel De Certeau's Poetics of Everyday Life,"[^16] illustrates so
well, De Certeau artfully describes the infinite process of interaction
between strategies (structures) and tactics (uses) in the everyday
practice of meaning.

![](media/image4.jpeg){width="6.499305555555556in" height="4.875in"}

Much like the streets in a city grid offer a structure that walkers of
the city can use in ways that may challenge the intention of the city
planners, I will build some defined pathways through the fragmented
space of *a proximate bible*. Each of the three material bible
experiments in this project--*scoll to codex to kindle*, *(re)placing
the veil*, and *facing the deep* will offer an explicit path through
their essential posts. Not all of the curation or composition related to
these experiments will be included in the paths, but I will build a
strategic thread through each space of inquiry as a place begging for
tactical motion or use.

Following De Certeau and Higmore's graphic, here I link strategy and
place as indicating structured 'proper' location. Yet, I am still
grappling with the difference between place and space in De Certeau and
other thinkers who deal with human geography such as Tim Cresswell,
Jacob Kinnard and Edward Soja. For now, I tend away from De Certeau's
articulation of space as practiced place[^17] and align more with
Cresswell's opposite suggestion of place as practiced space.[^18] All
this said, I am practicing a methodology that creates and participates
in an ongoing community of inquiry and takes seriously the fact that
medium matters.

**Mapping Interfaces**

At a recent Society of Biblical Literature conference session in
Atlanta, my friend Tim talked about our present age in terms of a
proliferation of media. This term, ‘proliferation,’ struck me as a
wonderful expression of creativity and emergence. At a simplistic level,
all I mean here by proliferation is a rapid expansion. Yet, this process
of expansion carries a notion of explosion and dissemination at a rate
that makes it impossible to keep up with traditional demands for
classification and categorization. In the first few paragraphs of
Bennington and Massumi’s English translation of Lyotard’s *The
Postmodern Condition*,[^19] we find mention of proliferation and
technologies:[^20]

![](media/image5.png){width="6.497222222222222in"
height="1.2138888888888888in"}

Though Marshall McLuhan doesn’t use the term ‘proliferation’ explicitly
in either *Gutenberg Galaxy*[^21] or *Understanding Media*,[^22] Taylor
and Harris note in [*Critical Theories of Mass Media: Then and
Now*](http://amzn.com/0335218113)[^23] that ‘a proliferation of new
media’ threatening the dominance of print sits right at the junction
between these two major works of McLuhan’s.

![](media/image6.png){width="6.49375in" height="4.320833333333334in"}

Fifty years later, I am still working with the cultural ramifications of
‘the point at which the lineal-visual hegemony of print technology
begins to unravel in the **face** of a *proliferation* of new
media.’[^24] Taylor and Harris also note the ways in which McLuhan’s
writing in *Understanding Media* attempts to perform the characteristics
of the new media he explores, eschewing what they call a ‘scholarly
*proliferation* of detail and citation.’ This is precisely the approach
I have taken in the material media that make up *a proximate bible*. In
fact, in one of the comments on this project,[^25] my friend and
colleague Gil Rosenberg described the proliferation of media in this
project wonderfully, saying:

![](media/image7.png){width="6.498611111111111in"
height="1.6861111111111111in"}

I can feel the threat that this proliferation of media might pose to an
academy and a biblical society that have constructed an identity out of
the desire and acumen for consolidation toward an original thesis,
comprehensive encyclopedias, and the pursuit of an original manuscript.
Perhaps we can find some ways to translate these demands for
consolidation into the constantly emerging landscape that is this
particular new media age?

This *a proximate bible* project is far from a proliferation on the
scale of google or facebook, but there are several possible interfaces
with the conversations and communities that compose this work and even
more tools involved in the facilitation of these interfaces. Below, I
will try to provide a map, or some maps, to encourage exploration. This
Prezi[^26] offers a graphical and spatial map of the interfaces and
tools that shape the landscape of *a proximate bible*. This map is a
snapshot in time of the landscape, which may change and evolve as new
tools become available and needed. I chose Prezi as a mapping tool here
because it illustrates a balance of the pathfinding and the exploration
possible in new media translations of maps.

**Composing for Web, Not Print (postach.io and Evernote)**

The primary interface with *a proximate bible* for most people will be
the web space *a proximate bible*.[^27] The team at postach.io has
provided a wonderful public web interface for those of us who love to
write and compose in Evernote. I have used Evernote for years as an
artifact and note aggregator across devices. The mobile sensibilities of
Evernote and the sparse formatting demands were what initially drew me
to the tool. As I have continued to use Evernote, the interplay of
fragment, collection, and search in the interface has become a material
media translation for me of the literary montage methodology in Walter
Benjamin’s Arcades Project.[^28]

I have linked an Evernote notebook to aproximatebible.postach.io through
pistach.io’s core Evernote integration. So, anytime I add the tag
‘published' to a note in this notebook, the Evernote sync process
triggers a translation of this note into a web page on the *a proximate
bible* site.[^29] Because I am composing for a web medium and not print,
I compose posts with markdown,[^30] a basic syntax for formatting text
that is easy to read and can be readily translated into HTML. This
Evernote - postach.io integration enacts a material media translation of
my curated posts from Evernote markdown to HTML in a themed web space.
Though my Evernote notebook is private, all changes I make to any posts
tagged as published are translated to the public web space on postach.io
the next time Evernote syncs.[^31]

**Making Conversation (disqus and Quip)**

Perhaps the most significant interface for *a proximate bible* has been
the integration of the disqus conversation engine into the postach.io
space. One of the main reasons I chose a web based medium for this
project, rather than print, was to explore the asynchronous conversation
and engagement possibilities with my intellectual community, both
internal to the project and beyond. Disqus provides a widely used online
discussion framework that is designed to integrate well with other web
tools and spaces. The postach.io - disqus integration embeds a
conversation space at the bottom of each post, with a disqus thread
dedicated to each *a proximate bible* entry. In this disqus space,
people can engage and interact with me, the project, and with each other
through questions and comments and sharing resources. The questions and
ideas offered in this discussion become a part of the space that is the
post and thus, they become a part of the project. Disqus offers a public
and participatory interface for *a proximate bible* and has proven a
wonderfully rich space for engagement and encounter, thanks mostly to my
generous, curious and creative intellectual community.

One interesting design note regarding this disqus integration is the
decision to locate these discussion threads at the bottom of the page.
This is a widely used format for discussion on web artifacts in many
other tools (e.g. blogs, news sites, etc.) and it facilitates an ease of
technological integration. Yet, we can see the palimpsestuous echoes of
print footnotes in this interface design. At the bottom of the page,
after the ‘body' of the work, we find the indications of our
conversation partners.

I can’t decide if these ‘footer’ conversation spaces are a media
translation of footnotes or endnotes, or a mashup of the two? Footnotes,
as a print interface, are dictated by the material size of a print page,
whereas endnotes are shaped by the transitions in or completion of a
particular content unit. Since we still call these web reading
interfaces, ‘pages,’ (a cultural palimpsest of its own) it isn’t hard to
imagine the spaces and interactions at the bottom of the page as under
foot. Yet, the material limits of a web page do not dictate the footer
interface as the page dimensions do in print. Undoubtedly, there are
material limits to the design and shape of a web page, but most often,
it is a transition in a content unit (e.g. the end of my writing in a
post) that signals the foot of the page on the web. Further, the larger
project of *a proximate bible* has several ‘pages’ of content with notes
and conversation at the bottom of each page, not simply at the end of
the project, wherever that may be. Perhaps, these footer disqus
conversations are most like a translation of chapter endnotes in a print
codex. All that said, I look forward to digital dissertation projects
that use technologies translating manuscript marginalia more than print
footnotes, such as medium[^32] and genius.[^33] Medium brings us one of
the most inspiring new ways of imagining collaborative reading interface
beyond print.[^34]

My initial hope was to have this disqus space provide a place for my
dissertation committee to regularly participate in the project by
critically engaging my curation and writing, while also contributing to
the community dialog that ensued. Many factors, including the publicness
of this space and the unfamiliar timeline of participating in smaller
bits along the way, have limited my engagement with my committee in the
postach.io/disqus interface of *a proximate bible*. As a way to practice
a kind of material media translation and to create a more familiar and
private interface for my committee and me to have conversation around
the quality and content of the project, I built a small python
application to translate postach.io posts into Quip documents. Quip is a
mobile-centric collaborative authoring tool that allows invited accounts
to co-author documents and have conversations in the margins. Quip
offers another interface for *a proximate bible*, but a private one in
this case. Comments, conversations, and changes my committee and I make
in Quip do not automatically sync to Evernote or postach.io, so they are
only available to the four of us. Yet, I have no doubt that the things I
discuss with my committee in Quip will lead to revisions, additions, and
new conversations in the postach.io interface. With the addition of
Quip, we can now see that each entry I compose in this dissertation has
a minimum of three material versions (Evernote, postach.io, and Quip),
each constructing a different reading interface.[^35]

**Making Space (GitHub and Python)**

Crafting the material spaces of *a proximate bible* has as much to do
with the meaning of this project as does the content of the
conversation. Medium matters. As I have highlighted elsewhere,[^36]
postach.io offers an integration with github[^37] that allows me to
customize the interface of *a proximate bible* to fit the theoretical
reflections of this project and the needs of my reading community.
Git[^38] is a revision control system that allows developers to write
code collaboratively, to test and discuss code before making it live,
and to track changes and history throughout the project life cycle.
GitHub is one of many hosting services for git projects that makes it
easy to collaborate and share code with people all over the world. Git
is the primary tool I use to make and track changes to *a proximate
bible* interfaces, but GitHub offers a public interface for this code
and the history of my changes. I began with a copy of an existing
postach.io theme called gridley and built from there. You can see this
code and its history in my GitHub repository for this site theme.[^39] I
will also be using GitHub to provide a public interface for the python
modules I build to manage the posatch.io to Quip translation and the
prox-inity[^40] bible interface.

**Translating Bibliography (Twitter and Zotero)**

As I discuss in my reflections on bibliography in curating the
conversation,[^41] there are two main interfaces for resource
aggregation beyond the linking done within the entries in *a proximate
bible*. Zotero[^42] is an open source bibliographic management tool that
allows me to collect and organize artifacts (books, articles, web pages,
links, etc.) related to this project. The Zotero collection for *a
proximate bible*[^43] is publicly available for browsing and searching,
but I have retained the exclusive rights to add to the collection.
Though the tool can do more, my use of this Zotero public interface
provides a fairly straightforward material media translation of a print
bibliography with the added advantages of tagging and search.

If others have suggestions for items to be added to this collection or
simply want to share artifacts or resources related to the conversations
of *a proximate bible*, anyone can use twitter hashtags, my second
channel for resource aggregation. Any tweets with \#aproximatebible or
\#aproxibib are aggregated in the a proximate bible twitter search.[^44]
This twitter channel has been an important interface for *a proximate
bible*, performing the values of collaboration, conversation, and a more
radical material media translation of bibliography.[^45]

**Channels (Twitter, Facebook, email, RSS)**

One of the advantages of composing for the web is the ability to tap
into the communication streams people use regularly to stimulate
engagement with the project. Every time I release a new entry to a
proximate bible, I push a notification to Facebook[^46] and
Twitter.[^47] For people who use RSS to manage feeds from sites that
they monitor, my postach.io site provides a feed URL[^48] in the top
right corner. Recently, I have added an email subscription[^49] option
as well, since email is still the most organized and prevalent
communication stream used by many in the academy. All of these channels
offer interfaces with *a proximate bible* that shape the spaces and
conversations that make this project what it is.

Perhaps this map I have just detailed represents a proliferation of
interfaces characteristic of our present new media age. Hopefully this
challenges our tendencies toward consolidation, while providing many
surfaces of contact with the community of conversation that is *a
proximate bible*.

APPENDIX A

http://aproximatebible.postach.io

[^1]: Throughout this project, I will refer to bible without the
    definite article to remind us of the plurality of tradition that
    constitutes the cultural phenomenon we often call "the bible."

[^2]: McLuhan, *Understanding Media* (New York, McGraw-Hill, 1964).

[^3]: Thanks to Timothy Beal for the adaptation of the old reception
    history language of "bible in media" to the more material notion of
    "bible as media."

[^4]: Levinas, [*Ethics and
    Infinity*](http://books.google.com/books/about/Ethics_and_Infinity.html?id=jvTfAAAAMAAJ),
    23.

[^5]: See Simon Critchley with Peter Atterton and Graham Noctor
    translating Levinas, [*Basic Philosophical
    Writings*](http://amzn.com/0253210798), 81

[^6]: http://aproximatebible.postach.io/anarchic-approximations/

[^7]: Undoubtedly, you will see myriad places where my thinking and my
    writing slip into performing codex (e.g. closure, totality,
    fixicity, stability). I can only hope those moments will provide
    ample opportunity for dialog and growth.

[^8]: http://www.oxfordbiblicalstudies.com/article/opr/t373/e57

[^9]: http://amzn.com/0674008022

[^10]: http://amzn.com/0520271459

[^11]: http://www.oxfordbiblicalstudies.com/article/opr/t373/e57

[^12]: The reason I put publish in quotes is to note the strange
    adoption of this decidedly print term into the standard vernacular
    of writing for the web. Postach.io even uses the tag published as
    the trigger to push a note from a private Evernote notebook to the
    related public webspace. Yet, it is important to note that I can
    edit a note at any time and these changes will immediately
    sychronize to the web. So, this writing for the web is radically
    more flexible than print publishing. For more, see my related post
    [Published?](http://amemorablefancy.postach.io/published).

[^13]: All comments shared in the disqus space in a proximate bible will
    be moderated. Moderation will allow my committee members to make
    suggestions that they do not want to perform in public space and
    will facilitate the filtering out of dehumanizing or spam posts.

[^14]: Gary D. Mole translating Levinas, [*Beyond the
    Verse*](http://amzn.com/0826499031), 130.

[^15]: Benjamin, [*The Arcades Project*](http://amzn.com/0674008022),
    N1a, 8.

[^16]: http://www.slideshare.net/zelihauyurca/michel-de-certeau-poetics-of-everyday-life

[^17]: De Derteau, [The Practice of Everyday
    Life](http://amzn.com/0520271459), 117.

[^18]: Cresswell, [Place: A Short
    Introduction](http://amzn.com/1405106727), 11.

[^19]: http://amzn.com/0816611734

[^20]: Bennington and Massumi translating Lyotard, [*The Postmodern
    Condition*](http://amzn.com/0816611734), 4.

[^21]: http://amzn.com/144261269X

[^22]: http://amzn.com/1584230738

[^23]: http://amzn.com/0335218113

[^24]: Taylor and Harris, *Critical Theories of Mass Media*, 92,
    emphasis added.

[^25]: http://aproximatebible.postach.io/post/mapping-interfaces\#comment-2464887834

[^26]: Prezi URL...

[^27]: http://aproximatebible.postach.io/

[^28]: Benjamin, [*The Arcades Project*](http://amzn.com/0674008022),
    N1a, 8.

[^29]: I have written about my discomfort with this ‘published' tag
    convention in
    [Published?](http://amemorablefancy.postach.io/post/published).
    Early versions of this integration allowed users to choose their own
    tag to signal postach.io to translate a note to the web space. If I
    could choose a tag now, I would use “translate."

[^30]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/

[^31]: In the course of writing this, I realized that it would be
    meaningful to indicate both a release date for each post and its
    most recent update date. I have changed the curated by date in post
    headings to be the created date from Evernote and I added a most
    recent update date in parentheses. The curated date indicates when
    the note was first created in Evernote, not when it was first
    translated to postach.io.

[^32]: https://medium.com/about/about-medium-9eac453da935\#.s6s2ewe5r

[^33]: http://lit.genius.com/

[^34]: *See [notes
    afoot](http://aproximatebible.postach.io/notes-afoot/) for more of
    my reflections on footnotes as an interface.*

[^35]: One of the advantages of Quip over the disqus interface, related
    to my reflections above on footnotes, is Quip’s marginalia model of
    comments and conversation.

[^36]: http://aproximatebible.postach.io/reading-interfaces/

[^37]: https://github.com/about

[^38]: https://git-scm.com/

[^39]: https://github.com/textpotential/theme-gridly

[^40]: http://aproximatebible.postach.io/mediating-proximity/

[^41]: http://aproximatebible.postach.io/curating-the-conversation/

[^42]: https://www.zotero.org/

[^43]: https://www.zotero.org/textualpotential/items/tag/aproximatebible

[^44]: https://twitter.com/search?q=%23aproxibib%20OR%20%23aproximatebible

[^45]: Until very recently, I was using
    [rebelmouse](https://www.rebelmouse.com/aproximatebible/) to provide
    this community sourced tagged aggregation space using more channels
    than just twitter. Recently, rebelmouse has ended support for
    twitter hashtag sources except for Enterprise customers, which is
    cost prohibitive for this project. I will continue to look for a
    free or low cost option for multi-source media aggregation, but for
    now, twitter’s enhanced search API offers the necessary
    functionality.

[^46]: http://www.facebook.com/mphemenway

[^47]: http://www.twitter.com/textpotential

[^48]: http://aproximatebible.postach.io/feed.xml

[^49]: http://eepurl.com/bK7vGb
