---
layout:	post
title:	Codex all the way down?
date:	2014-09-02 04:21:53
image:	/assets/article_images/w600_91dca31d08e046b03da08f2c28e50093.png
---
Over a decade ago, in a piece called [*Bibles du
Jour*](http://www.timothybeal.com/Beal-BiblesduJour-CHE.pdf), and more
recently in his 2011 book, [The Rise and Fall of the
Bible](http://amzn.com/B004KABBYK), Tim Beal invites us to consider the
role of media and book culture in shaping the cultural capital operative
in ideas of bible.\

From a different angle, questions of the relationship between book media
and bible are also raised by the massive undertaking of the [Codex
Sinaiticus Project](http://www.codexsinaiticus.org), a collaborative
effort to digitize a stunningly beautiful fourth century C.E. codex
manuscript containing many texts that are found in christian bibles
purchased in stores today.

![](/assets/article_images/w600_91dca31d08e046b03da08f2c28e50093.png)\
In 2011, I had the privilege of participating in a panel discussion on
bible and technology which included both Tim Beal and Juan Garcés, the
curator of the Codex Siniaticus Project. I remember being deeply
impressed by the acumen and grace of Beal and intimidated by the sheer
magnitude of the siniaticus project and the confidence of its curator.
Yet, even then, a suspicion was growing in me that the codex as a
cultural form, expressed grandly in both the sinaiticus project and the
dominant ideas of bible in the contemporary marketplace, has remained
largely unquestioned in its potential tendency toward totalization and
even dehumanization.

Does a project like the digitization of Codex Sinaiticus offer an
opportunity to explore the cracks in the binding of this ancient codex
in a new way? In what ways might a codex sensibility be reinscribed even
through these exciting new technologies? The project nicely highlights
the importance of Codex Sinaiticus as a window into the important
conversations and revisions that happen in the margins of these ancient
books. Yet, to what degree do the XML encoding schemes and even the
lighting techniques used for digitization, reinforce a preference for an
original text of “the oldest bible,” as the tagline of their main page
reads?

This project, *a proximate bible*, hopes to play around in the spaces
and cracks of things like the codex sinaiticus project to explore the
intimate relationship between bible, technology, and meaning.

> Sarah Pessin has helped me better imagine this playing around as a
> ‘difficult curiosity,’ with emphasis on the difficult.

Danny Yencich rasied some fantastic questions in response to this post
(see below in the disqus commenting area for his [comment in
context](http://aproximatebible.postach.io/post/codex-all-the-way-down#comment-2016209256)):\
![](/assets/article_images/d7e33c64-52cd-4264-bde7-8fad28a52828.png)\
Danny’s questioning of the materiality on offer in the codex sinaiticus
project reminds me that materialities are always multiple. What kind of
materiality or access to materiality does the complex montage interface
of the Codex Sinaiticus Project offer with the detached pages,
transcriptions, and english translations? In what ways does an interface
like this resist or erase other materialities? Does the deep encoding
involved in the Codex Sinaiticus Project overly textualize and/or
commodify this ancient manuscript? Are there different materialities
offered by three major manuscript digitization projects?

-   [Codex Sinaiticus](http://www.codexsinaiticus.org)
-   [Codex Bezae](http://cudl.lib.cam.ac.uk/view/MS-NN-00002-00041/)
-   [Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus](http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b8470433r) - also
    available through the [gallicabnf iOS app](https://appsto.re/us/FhPFH.i)

What assumptions do each of these technologies signal and what kinds of
reading dispositions might they encourage? How would you teach using
these tools? What would you signal regarding the importance of the many
media layers at work?